Iran never considered that it should lay
down its weapons and just give in and
this is proven extremely costly to them.
And now this is the final battle. This
is where we've ended up.
>> Vali Nasr, political scientist and
expert on Iran.
>> And we've won. In the first hour it was
over.
>> If the president was looking for a quick
political uprising in Iran, it's not
happening and it won't happen until the
dust of this war settles.
>> The dust of this war settles. How long
do you think that is going to take?
>> I think longer than President Trump is
hoping for. This is an endurance run.
You're going to get battered but you
just got to stay up on your feet and
keep going.
>> From Bloomberg Weekend, this is the
Michelle Hussein show.
The question of when the Iran war will
come to an end is one that so many
people are grappling with and worrying
about right now. And it's at the heart
of the conversation you're about to
hear. How can Iran still be firing
missiles and drones despite the force
the United States and Israel are using
against it? What does the new supreme
leader think he can achieve? That's what
made me think of Vali Nasr, a professor
and author who I knew could take us into
the mindset of Iran's key players. He's
someone who's devoted his life to the
study of this complex country and region
and its relationship with the United
States. He once advised the Obama
administration. And Iran's story of the
last 50 years has changed his own life,
too. When the 1979 revolution created
the Islamic Republic, he and his family
were forced into exile and he's lived in
the US ever since.
In this, you'll hear Vali Nasr explain
how Iran is playing a long game, seeing
this as a final stand against American
might. And he talks about how the
Iranian diaspora is being torn apart by
this war, as well as how inside Iran,
it's leading people to rally around the
flag.
Vali, welcome. Thank you for being part
of this, for having this conversation at
this very intense time. Can we begin
with what the president has been saying
just before the two of us speak,
suggesting that the war will end soon?
What do you think?
>> I think that is what he wants. I mean,
he from the very beginning, he was
hoping that this would be a very quick
war, that he would have a major win,
kill the supreme leader, bomb some
strategic sites in Iran along with
Israel, and that there would be a new
leadership in Iran. And he would be the
president who brought Iran in from the
cold, so to say, changed the direct
trajectory of Iran's development.
And now this war has gone out of his
control. It's far longer, far messier,
and is actually exacting a cost from the
United States, both in terms of damage
to its bases,
to its military in the region,
but also to energy markets and the
global economy as a whole.
So, I think he's signaling that he wants
to end it, but I don't think Iran is
ready to to quit. I think they've put
their teeth into the United States right
now, and they are not ready to let go.
They've already suffered a lot,
and I think they're prepared to suffer
more, but they want to come out of this
war with changing the US's calculation.
They don't want to go back to the status
quo before.
>> But how much are they really prepared to
suffer? Is that endlessly? Because the
the price that they're already paying,
more than a thousand people killed, the
fuel depots set on fire, the oil
supplies affected by that. How large is
the price that they're willing to pay?
>> It is a large price, but I think they
had calculated this from before, that of
course going up against two superior
militaries with enormous amount of air
power that Iran was going to suffer.
But, I think their calculation is that
this is not a munitions count. This is
not about who has bigger bomb. This is
about who has a higher threshold of
pain.
And uh they think United States and
Israel can dash a lot faster, but
they're not really long-distance
runners. And so, I think they're
prepared to absorb this for far longer.
And every including the choice of a new
leader in in Iran, the fact that the
population is getting angry at the US
and Israel, and is rallying around the
defense of the country, all of it tell
them that uh that they can last longer.
And so, this comes down to the end of
who has more patience and and who has a
higher threshold of pain.
>> But, Iran's calculation of doing all of
that to what end? To going back to the
status quo before this war?
>> No, I think their thinking is that this
had to be the last war.
Either they go down or that the United
States and Israel will abandon the idea
that they could go into Iran and have a
war every 6 months or at will. This idea
of mowing the lawn.
That the United States and Israel, and
particularly United States, has to pay
high enough a cost to lose its appetite
for war with Iran. And also, I think
they want, as part of a settlement, that
the sanctions would be lifted, that the
maximum pressure would be lifted on
Iran, there would be some kind of maybe
even a ceasefire and withdrawal of
Israel from Lebanon. But, also they are
saying very openly that they want the
United States to abandon its bases in
the region. And they're following a very
clever strategy here of convincing the
Arab the Gulf states that the United
States bases are not really there to
protect them. They're not protecting
them. They're there to wage war against
Iran and invite war on the Gulf.
And I think they're hoping that when
this war ends, that it will problematize
the US presence in the region. And so,
this kind of a cordon that has been
around Iran for a very long time, will
break down. Now, these might be
maximalist goals. I'm not saying they're
going to achieve it. But, this is
exactly what is driving them.
>> And is this particularly what has driven
Mojtaba Khamenei, the son of the now
killed Ayatollah and the new supreme
leader?
>> Yes, he's very closely associated with
this view. First of all, what Israel and
the United States have done is to
eliminate the first generation of the
revolution by and large from the
leadership, particularly in the
Revolutionary Guards and now the supreme
leader.
So, there's a whole new generation of
younger Revolutionary Guards commanders
have come to the fore, who have a very
different view of national security.
These are not people who earned their
stripes in the Iran-Iraq War, in a big
land war. These are people who fought
against the US and ISIS in Syria and in
Iraq. They have a very different view of
national security. And Mojtaba is very
closely associated with them. In fact,
Mojtaba was very intimately involved in
the whole process of shaping the
Revolutionary Guards over the past 25
years of who got promoted, who rose in
the ranks. So, he's very tight with
them. And also, I would add, Michelle,
that Mojtaba, among all the other
candidates, has two qualities that
really matter now. One is that because
he's been sitting next to his father for
the past three decades,
he, as well as the fact that he is a
veteran of the Revolutionary Guards
himself, and a cleric, he's the most
ready candidate to step in the job day
one, and doesn't need two, three years
to learn the job and to get settled in.
And secondly, the manner in which his
father, his wife, his son, his sister
were killed, particularly in the
religious aura of Iran, even in the
nationalist aura of Iran, gives him a
particular charisma. In other words,
he's earned this office not because he's
a grand Ayatollah or a great scholar,
because of the his suffering. I mean, he
replicates Shia saints or or or mythical
Iranian heroes. So, he's the only
candidate out of the ones that was
nominated that actually has the greatest
charisma, if you would, in terms of
stepping out into this role.
>> But doesn't the choice also challenge
how many outsiders think of the
theocracy? Because father-to-son
succession is not supposed to be a thing
in the Islamic Republic. And as you say,
he doesn't have the religious
credentials. He hasn't spent all those
decades in Islamic learning and becoming
an Ayatollah.
>> Well, neither had his father. I mean,
this office is is metamorphosing over
time since Khomeini took it over. So,
Khamenei also was not a grand Ayatollah
in the traditional sense of being really
learned with a huge following. It's the
office that made him. And he was
referred to a supreme leader more often,
which is a very secular title. And his
son, similarly.
You're correct that even Khamenei
himself was of two minds as to whether
it was a wise idea to have a dynastic
succession. But at the same time, this
succession is coming in the middle of a
time when the country is actually
fighting for its survival. It's not just
a regime.
That's very true. But when President
Trump talks about arming the Kurds or
that Iran's borders may not be the same
at the end of this war, he's threatening
Iran itself. And therefore, the the I
think the ultimately the Council of
Experts resolved on the leader they
thought that was the best for this
moment. And as I said, Mojtaba brings
certain qualities that he can do the
job, that he has the charisma, and the
backing of the Revolutionary Guards, the
people who are charged to do this war.
>> So, has the effect of this war been to
transform Iran in the opposite way to
what the US intended? Because I'm
conscious that you were writing before
this of a regime under so much pressure
because of sanctions, because of the
cost of living. We saw the protests at
the start of this year and the way that
they were put down. And yet now you're
painting a picture not only of the
determination of the regime to carry on,
but people turning against the United
States and Israel.
>> Very much so. I mean, we saw in January
that there were enormous protests in
Iran against the regime. And there is
still huge amount of anger and dislike
of the regime. Nobody wants to live
under theocracy or economic isolation.
But that simple black and white choice
for Iranians, us against the regime, has
been complicated with the fact that the
country is under attack in a massive
way.
Iranians are fighting for their
survival. I mean, if the city of Tehran
is under acid rain because of the
bombing of oil depots,
people might die, people are dying,
their lives are being destroyed. And so
there there is a whole new, if you
would,
political line opening up in Iran. Are
you for war or you against war? As
opposed to are you for the regime or you
against the regime?
And then are you for protecting Iran or
are you willing to risk the destruction
of Iran? And this is complicating the
picture very much so. And increasingly
what we are seeing that even anti-regime
Iranians are showing up in these rallies
to basically saying at this particular
moment is not the time to have our
internal fight over politics, but to
actually support the country. And so, if
the president was looking for a quick
political uprising in Iran,
it's not happening and it won't happen.
It will not happen until the dust of
this war settles. So, for now, the
Iranian public is not a factor in this
war. And this was something that both
Israel and the United States had been
counting on that the war would pave the
way for a popular uprising.
>> The dust of this war settles. How long
do you think that is going to take?
>> I think longer than President Trump is
hoping for. He thinks that he can just
turn the switch off.
And it's not that simple because unless
he's willing to offer Iranians something
big and he's willing to negotiate over
some fundamental terms like that I
mentioned to you, I don't think the
Iranians are ready right now. I think
they are rebuffing overtures from the US
right now. That it's not like like last
time.
And then it really depends Michelle on
on how this war ends. I think the future
of the Islamic Republic will depend
whether they come out of this war
damaged but with their head held high
that they withstood these two massive
militaries and came out intact and
forced certain compromises on them
or whether they get actually collapsed
or get battered and then have to accept
a ceasefire.
>> And do you think that as this progresses
it could involve terrorism that that
could be a dimension that that Iran
chooses to employ?
>> It might. I don't want to say
definitively not, but I think they
already have their strategy. They they
don't need to to do something that
actually may turn off public opinion.
I mean I was in India recently and and
it's very clear that outside the United
States and the West they're enjoying
huge amount of support
for standing up to Donald Trump, for
standing tall. And and also they are
actually inflicting pain on the United
States. I think a $120 barrel oil and
the shutdown of the economies of the
Gulf hurting varieties of other
businesses than just energy is much more
effective for them than actually acts of
terrorism which will only play into the
hands of the US to demonize them.
>> And I imagine playing into that is some
of the searing images of the last 2
weeks. The school girls who it appears
were killed by Tomahawk missiles which
are used by the United States. Donald
Trump saying that Iranian naval ships
have been sunk rather than captured
because it's fun.
Also the destruction of heritage, the
the bombing of a city like Isfahan.
>> Yes, those things actually will turn the
Iranian particularly the damage to to
the heritage will turn the Iranian
public hugely against the United States
and and Israel.
I think it convinces the population that
the US and Israel are not liberators and
they actually are out to destroy Iran
and it's not about the regime, it's
about Iran. But this is going not going
to be the war that President Trump had
planned. And so the Iranians are are you
know exploring within this story about
ways that they can get leverage and they
can actually come out in a way that
gives them advantage. And I would add
Mishal that there is a lesson they
learned in June
which is important to them and they do
repeat it all the time in their media
etc. That in June it was not they who
asked for a ceasefire. In their opinion
it was Israel that asked the United
States for a ceasefire. So Israel
bombarded Iran in 12 days but towards
the 12th day it was getting exhausted.
It was running out of interceptors.
And so Iranians came to this conclusion
that to fight the United States and
Israel you cannot match them in terms of
firepower. This is an endurance run.
You're going to get battered but you
just got to stay up on your feet and
keep going.
>> Fally, can we go further back in time to
get your your take and for you to help
us understand Iran's psyche
um because your book Iran's grand
strategy a political history goes back
in time before the revolution. But I was
particularly struck by how you describe
the impact of the war in the 1980s with
Iraq where Iran really stood alone. The
outside world was really on Saddam
Hussein's side. And the lesson it
learned at that point is that the key
moment where that determination that
Iran has to stand on its own feet comes
from.
>> Yes, exactly. I mean, that was a
harrowing war. Probably up force of a
half a million Iranians died. It took
eight years. It depleted national
resources.
It was the educational moment for a
whole generation of revolutionary
readers, including Ayatollah Khamenei,
who was Iran's president during the war,
a whole generation of revolutionary
guard commanders.
And in that war,
Iran ultimately was able to liberate its
territory and then continue to wage war
against Iraq basically by relying on its
own resources, learning how to fight
when nobody would sell it tanks,
artillery, air force, and everybody was
supporting Saddam.
And they they learned that international
organizations won't support Iran because
it's a revolutionary government. Nobody
would sell it anything. It increasingly
was under sanctions.
So, the Islamic for 47 years has grown
up, if you would, trying to figure out
how to do it on its own and that it's
alone and it has to protect itself by
its own resources. I mean, we see this
in the fact that they're able to produce
these missiles and drones. They're not
buying them. This is a do-it-yourself
country, which is a consequence of its
isolation.
>> Yes, isolated in that way, but also
willing and able to sow destruction
elsewhere, whether it's the drones that
have been used by Russia against Ukraine
or of course Hezbollah in Iran and the
Houthis.
>> Absolutely. I mean, in their own
thinking and I and I underscore that. I
know how it looks to their adversaries,
friends, etc. around the region, but in
their own
thinking, there is a strategy to this.
This is not wanting destruction or some
kind of a war on the world in the name
of religion.
Iran has been isolated by the United
States, put in a box. The United States
has made alliances with its neighbors.
It has built large military bases all
around Iran. And then it's economically
has been sanctioning Iran and tightening
the cord around it for the past 47
years. So, to them, they cannot fight
this in a conventional way. Nobody will
help them. So, essentially, it's an idea
of a global sort of guerrilla strategy
against the US.
That you know, you you build militias in
Lebanon, in Iraq, in Syria in order to
defend yourself farther away from your
borders. That you need Russia's help for
varieties of reasons, and the price for
that is to help Russia at its moment of
need because you need a Russian veto
when the United States wants to put you
under sanctions at the UN.
Or that you try to needle the Arab
countries in order to raise the cost of
supporting the US strategy against Iran.
Now, it has often backfired on them. It
it won them the enmity of the Arab
world, and the strategy of defending
themselves in Lebanon and Syria
collapsed.
But Iran never considered that it should
lay down its weapons and just
give in and arrive at peace with Israel
and the US. It has been determined to
fight, and that's probably the folly or
the consequence of the strategy
Ayatollah Khomeini Khamenei and Khomeini
pursued.
This idea that United States is a threat
to Iran. The United States wants to take
our sovereignty. We have to keep the US
out of Iran, in fact, kick it out of the
Middle East. And this has proven
extremely costly to them. And now this
is the final battle. This is where we've
ended up.
>> The final battle?
As in it is existential then for the
Iranian regime, you think, one way or
another?
>> Uh yes, and in fact, they call this the
final battle. In other words, either we
go down or that cordon gets broken. They
very well understand that this 47 years
of resistance to the United States is no
longer sustainable in the way that it
was waged.
Iran is dying economically. It's
continuously attacked by Israel and and
the United States now on its own soil
since the collapse of Hezbollah in
Syria.
And so this is the final stand that
either they go down, either resistance
collapses,
or resistance manages to change the
rules of the game. And that's what
they're betting on.
>> So if you were
designing a US policy towards Iran right
now, and I know you you worked on US
policy, right? You were an adviser to
the State Department. You worked in the
State Department in President Obama's
time,
which did result in a policy of
engagement towards Iran in that there
were nuclear negotiations, so that's a
form of engagement.
If that path had been continued, if
Donald Trump hadn't ripped up the Iran
deal, would it have resulted in a better
present, or is your description of the
regime too entrenched for that?
>> You know, I think it could have ended up
in a better place. First off, even
revolutionary governments evolve. So uh
it's not only that Trump came out of the
deal,
but what followed his coming out, in
other words, putting maximum pressure
sanctions on Iran and and trying to
squeeze Iran more. That maximum pressure
itself transformed Iran. It hardened it,
it radicalized it, it made it much more
determined that the US cannot be trusted
and is out to destroy Iran. The more
hardline, hardheaded leadership rose to
the helm in Iran.
Uh so that was one direct consequence.
Secondly, let's look at the other side.
Say the the deal had continued. Many of
those who were negotiating that deal,
like President Rouhani or
Foreign Minister Zarif, were of a of an
opinion that success of that deal was
the building block of gradual change
inside Iran and gradual change in
relations with the US. And I think
President Rouhani's office had an
estimation that if the deal had lasted
for 10 years, the size of Iran's middle
class would have grown by 35%.
And that was really the constituency for
change in Iran.
Whereas when Trump came out and imposed
maximum pressure, actually 20% of Iran's
middle class within the first 2 years
fell under the poverty belt.
And so, you know, a poorer society under
economic pressure becomes more
authoritarian and becomes more radical.
So, yes, I would say the JCPOA was a
leap of faith, but it is a tragedy when
we look back at that at one point. It
was a tragedy that it was not given the
opportunity to prove itself.
>> Do you think Iran will now be determined
to create a nuclear bomb if it possibly
can?
>> Yes, I think the door is open. First of
all, the former supreme leader Ali
Khamenei
had issued a fatwa saying that nuclear
weapons are forbidden under Islam.
Now, the West may dismiss this as
irrelevant, but to a Shia Ayatollah and
to his followers, a fatwa is quite a
very strong statement.
The Shias don't follow that that
Ayatollah's. That fatwa is now no longer
valid. It's not no longer standing. So,
it would be up to Mojtaba and clerics in
Qom to decide whether they would renew
that fatwa or not. But national security
imperatives now suggest that Iran will
go towards nuclear weapons. First of
all, they made a determination
that their strategy over 20 years of
trying to have an open nuclear program
that could be monitored by IAEA, trying
to prove to the world that they don't
want a bomb, was a mistake, that they
should have followed India-Pakistan
model. They should have never discussed
the program. They should have gone for a
bomb rather than a program. And so,
everything the West did actually made
them convinced that trying to negotiate
with the world for a civilian nuclear
program had been a mistake. It only
invited sanctions and war. So, where
they go from here, I think, is that
either they would give up the program
altogether, which I don't think is
likely, or that the program would be
essentially become much more of a
military program and a secret program.
>> That's a very stark prospect. I mean,
supposedly that's exactly what
countries like the United States and its
allies have been trying to prevent for
decades.
>> Well, if you It's very easy to sort of
think of Iran as a as an awful rogue
state in the West. And then to say,
"Well, this policy is specific to Iran."
But, every US policy has an audience out
there. You know, there's a lot of
countries now have dis- looked at this
and said that if they want to go down
that path, they should do it quickly and
secretly.
And that the United States and Europe
will play with you, will put sanctions
on you, will deal with you, sign a deal,
move out of the deal,
and in the end, you end up where Iran
is. And so, maybe many countries would
be dissuaded from even about nuclear
issue.
But, we're also in a world where
President Trump is encouraging everybody
around the world to develop a a weapon
of mass destruction to protect
themselves from a Venezuela-Iran
scenario.
And I recently read eminent Pakistani
scholar said that how grateful he is for
the first time in his life that his
country actually made the choice to
build nuclear weapons.
And so, that's a very huge statement.
So, there's a lot of other countries
that are afraid of this kind of American
foreign policy, of of changing
leadership on countries, bullying
countries,
and they will decide that they need
nuclear weapons.
And so, I think Iran has been a very,
very bad example for the rest of the
world.
>> Vali, can we go a little bit further
back in the 20th century than we've
already talked about? Because I learned
so much from your book about, for
example, Iran's experience in the Second
World War, and then in the Cold War, and
what someone like Khomeini, the founder
of the Islamic Republic, learned from
those experiences. Take us through what
happened.
>> I mean, the the leadership of the
Islamic Republic, but also the Iranian
people are keenly aware of Iran's
history. It's continuously evoked. And
it's a history in which Iran has barely
survived to the 20th century. That it
has had aggressive neighbors, Russia and
the Ottoman Empire, who've taken
territory from it. It's been abused by
the British and the French and
colonialism. And then in the 20th
century, in both World Wars, the country
went through famine because of Western
policies. It was occupied. It was nearly
divided, lost territory.
And the older generation of the Islamic
Republic was reared in that environment.
I mean, between 1946 end of World War II
and 1953,
Iran experienced massive amount of
foreign intervention. I mean, first in
1946, the Soviet Union occupied northern
Iran and wanted to break it off.
And it was America and Britain
intervened, that didn't happen. But
you had a generation, the monarchy,
etc., who basically were shaped by that
experience. And then barely 7 years
later, Britain and the United States
intervened in Iran to remove a prime
minister who wanted to nationalize
Iran's oil company.
>> This was
the CIA and MI6 in 1953 against Prime
Minister Mosaddegh.
>> In 1953. And so, for Khomeini, for
Khamenei,
they believe that the Islamic Republic
was created in order to change that
history. No more foreign intervention.
No more bullying by superpowers. That I
mean, they say this. And Iran's former
foreign minister, a few months ago, on a
interview with Foreign Policy magazine,
said, "The Islamic Republic is the first
government in Iran in over 200 years to
give Iran genuine sovereignty
and protect its borders." Because that
sort of history has been internalized by
the revolutionary leaders as 200 years
of Iranian Iran basically being under
the thumb of outsiders, including the
Shah's period. And I don't agree with
that analysis, but that's the history
that is in their minds. So history is
very important here in that sense.
>> What do you think of the Shah's son,
Reza Pahlavi, and his desire to be seen
as a future leader in Iran, and the
support that he seems to have got from
some people at least before this war,
the fact that his name was being chanted
on the streets?
>> Well, I think he did have a huge moment
before this war, and we'll see whether
it it continues for the reason that, you
know, historically there have been two
important institutions of power in Iran
since at least the 1500s. It's the
monarchy and the clergy.
So when the monarchy was in power and it
abused power, it was the clergy who
stood up for the people.
And when the clergy are in power and
they abuse power, it's the monarchy that
essentially people see as the alternate
institution. And Iranian monarchy has
always stood
for the grandeur and power of Iran
historically.
And also I have to say that under the
pressure and the abuse of power that has
happened in Iran under the Islamic
Republic, there's enormous amount of
nostalgia among Iranians for the Shah
and his father. That those were better
period despite authoritarianism and
Iranians had better lives. It was an
open country.
And the Shah's son is a beneficiary of
these deep feelings in Iran.
So he symbolizes the desire for a return
to the good old days, a sort of a future
cast in the image of a golden golden
past for many Iranians.
I think the problem right now is that
first of all, he never invested in
building a ground game in Iran, an
actual organization and movement. So
yes, he has there's enthusiastic
supporters that could ebb and flow,
but enthusiasm of the popularity is not
the same thing as having a political
program.
But in addition, he's allied very very
closely with both Israel and the United
States. And this runs against the grain
of Iranian nationalism. But we shall
see. I mean, you know, it all as I said
depends on how this war ends. But unless
he has a ground game in Iran, and unless
he actually stands and represents Iran's
desire for safety and security at this
point, I think it would be very
difficult for him to play a significant
role.
>> All this history that you're describing
the last few decades, it's
changed your life, hasn't it? Your
family's life. You were 18 when you had
to leave Iran yourself.
Can you describe that period, what it
was like to leave the country?
>> It was very difficult. I mean, we didn't
refer to it as refugees then, we called
it exiles. But my family left Iran very
very abruptly in 1979 for fear of
our safety, and all our property or
everything in Iran was taken by the
revolutionary government. And I ended up
going to school and and university in
the West. I think the disruption was
traumatic. It was traumatic for all
Iranians that have experienced it since.
It is extremely difficult to lose your
country.
Right? And do to do so involuntarily.
You know, there's difference between
migration and and refugee or or exile
status.
But you know, the bonds with where you
were born, where your identity comes
from, from the history that you know,
from people that you know,
are there. And so, the pain that Iran
faces at various times is a pain that
you continue to acutely face, even
though it's all been 47 years since I
lived in Iran.
>> Mhm. And I know you did manage to visit
once. I'm curious to know more about
your father, because I know of him by
reputation. He's a renowned scholar of
Islam. He's written many, many books
which are read by Muslims and others
alike over decades. Why was it not
possible for your family to stay in
Iran? Because I would have thought with
that kind of academic pedigree and his
knowledge of Islam that that would be
appreciated by the clerics and by
Khomeini.
>> Well, first of all, he worked in the
Shah's government. He was chancellor of
a university and towards the end he was
head of the Queen's special bureau. So,
that government affiliation made him a
target, if you would, for the
eradication that they were implementing
towards the Shah's officials. But,
secondly, not all Islams are the same.
So, my father stood for a mystical a
different interpretation of Islam that
was not the creed of the
revolutionaries. I mean, over the years
his books have been translated into
Persian and have a huge following in
Iran. But, the following is mostly among
those Iranians who have a deep cultural
and spiritual relationship with Islam or
want to have it but don't want to
subscribe to the political Islam of the
Islamic Republic.
And Islamic Republic, like all
revolutionary governments, is very
intolerant of those he sees as political
and ideological deviation or rivalry.
So, when you sort of get closer than
just basically, it's all Islam uh there
are many different uh shades and so, his
particular his writings, his approach uh
was not welcome, particularly. And at
the beginning, for the reason that I
mentioned, but even later, when his
books have become very popular in Iran,
it has created different kinds of
sensitivities about the sort of Islam
that is not supportive of the official
political Islam of the state.
>> How is he in the face of all of this?
What are your conversations like at the
moment?
>> I think for the his generation, uh this
is even more painful than mine because,
uh you know, they lived a far longer
time period in Iran.
And they saw much more of its history.
And now they are living to see the
destruction of the country.
And some of them also remember World War
II. Whereas my father was a child, and
so they they can very easily sort of
empathize with with that moment.
I think for all Iranians generally, I
mean, there are a segment of Iranians
abroad who are celebrating this war, but
I would put them aside. But for majority
of Iranians, I think this is an
incredibly painful moment, regardless of
what they think about the Islamic
Republic.
The relationship of Iranians to Iran is
a cultural, patriotic, nationalistic
relationship. It goes above and beyond
any one government. And I think for a
lot of them they feel it is not the
Islamic Republic that's suffering, it's
Iran that is suffering.
And and so so emotionally for them it's
very difficult. They also are living in
the countries that have a very different
perspective on this war.
And so that adds to the problem. I
remember when I first came to the US, it
was during the hostage crisis.
As a 17-18 year old, it was extremely
difficult being Iranian.
And then we all lived in the post-9/11
period, which was incredibly difficult
being a Muslim
in that environment. And now once again,
it is the similar kind of a situation
that America's at war with Iran. And for
a lot of Iranian-Americans, this again
is as difficult a moment as being a
Muslim-American was after 9/11.
>> How do you handle all of that yourself?
Because your job, as you're doing with
us right now, as you do when you write,
is to make sense of this complex and
difficult period, to interpret it.
But as you look at the videos and you
see messages on Telegram and elsewhere,
do you find yourself shaken?
>> Yes, often. I mean, deep down, I think
this animosity between US and Iran and
the policies of both sides has not been
good for either country. And I don't
think this war will serve the United
States either. So, the way I think about
this is in terms of what is good for the
Middle East, what's good for the United
States, and what's good for Iran.
But, you know, we all have to cope. As I
said, maybe having gone through
the experience of the hostage crisis
when I was much younger, having gone
through the experience of post-9/11
period, I think we are all more prepared
for this moment.
But, it is also deep fractures within
the Iranian-American community itself.
And that's in a way is even more painful
to watch and and and to experience at
this moment that also the the community
abroad is eating itself as a consequence
of of of these events.
>> The divisions, because some people, you
mean, are cheering the Americans and the
Israelis on?
>> Yes, exactly. They are, and this is
creating a great deal of It's become now
very much common to talk about how
friendships are broken, how people don't
talk to each other, how members of the
family don't talk to each other.
And it's very simple.
It used to be, are you, you know, for
the regime or not? And that was a much
easier answer.
But, now that is all do you support the
war or you do not support the war? At
what price should Iran pay for the
Islamic Republic to go?
I mean, there are those abroad who say
that they're willing even for Iran to be
divided, to lose territory, a war at any
cost
for the regime to go. And this makes for
very difficult conversations within the
community. And now it is not just that
Iranian-Americans or like
Muslim-Americans have to have difficult
conversations with American-Americans
who are Christians or Jews. It is the
most difficult conversations we're
having now is actually with our own
kindred.
>> And do you think that there will be a
change to to borders at the end of it?
Like, if you look at the Iraqi border
and the fact that there are Iranian
Kurdish groups which could cross that
border and which have had relationships
with the US. Or, if you think about the
border with Pakistan and the Baloch
people on both sides of that border.
>> It's possible. I mean, if their state
collapses in Iran and if this war truly
creates a situation where
Iranian security forces cannot control a
country the size of Western Europe
and you have neighbors along with the
United States and Israel supporting
separatist groups, it's possible
that one may end up there. But, I can
tell you Michelle that right now the
talk of it, the prospect of it, is
actually unifying the Iranian people at
the center in defense of the country.
So, when President Trump said, "I'm not
sure the borders of Iran
would be the same at the end of the
war." I can tell you in Iran this fell
like a two-ton rock. It created huge
amount of anxiety and and rallying, if
you would, to the flag. But, again, it
it shows the degree of anxiety that
Iranians are feeling and facing. It's
not about the collapse of the Islamic
Republic, which maybe many of them would
welcome in some ways.
But, they are really, really worried
that the price that the country itself
might pay. And I think that may create
even a sort of unexpected outcomes
within Iran and in terms of how it wages
this war, how the people react to it.
>> Fali, to close, I want to go to the
words with which you begin
your latest book, published last year,
where you wish that Iran finds its
rightful place in the world. Can you
paint a picture of that? What is your
vision for Iran's rightful place in the
world?
>> I mean, I would like to see a country
that is prosperous, that is open, that
its people are happy and is that is at
peace with
its neighbors and with itself. And Iran
for 47 years now has been at war.
Has been at war with the United States,
with Iraq. It's been at in economic war
and now in hot war.
And its population is exhausted. And its
population has a deep sense that Iran is
capable of much more than this, that it
should be a great power on the world
stage.
And I wish for that to come true, and I
wish for all Iranian Americans to be
able to not have a distant relationship
with Iran, but this this large
community, very talented people who love
their country,
to actually to be able to coexist with
it in an organic way.
And and and and same with the people
inside Iran to be exposed to the world
in a way that's that they currently are
not.
>> Vali Nasr, thank you so much for sparing
us some time.
>> Thank you.